src/programs.md, before:

# The LAMPORT execution environment

## Introduction

With LAMPORT (Language-Agnostic, Memory-oriented, Parallel-friendly, Optimized
Run-Time), we can execute smart contracts concurrently, and written in the
client’s choice of programming language. Furthermore, we demonstrate Solana’s
built-in smart contract language Budget can target LAMPORT without any loss in
performance. The two features that allow LAMPORT to work:

Client-owned memory identified by public keys. By declaring ownership upfront
and separating the program’s state from the program, the runtime knows which
contracts can safely be executed concurrently.  Solana’s blockchain-encoded VDF
tells validator nodes at precisely what times they need to end up in the same
state. Between those times, they are free to introduce non-deterministic
behavior as-needed to improve execution times.

## Toolchain Stack

<img alt="SDK tools" src="img/sdk-tools.svg" class="center"/>

As shown in the diagram above an untrusted client, creates a program in the
front-end language of her choice, (like C/C++/Rust/Lua), and compiles it with
LLVM to a position independent shared object ELF, targeting BPF bytecode.
Solana will safely load and execute the ELF.

Commit message:

Various book cleanup
* Merge Leader and Validator diagrams
* New sdk-tools diagram
* Move terminology to just after introduction
* Purge use of LAMPORT as an acronym
* Add notes about persistent storage

src/programs.md, after:

# The Solana SDK

## Introduction

With the Solana runtime, we can execute on-chain programs concurrently, and
written in the client’s choice of programming language.

## Client interactions with Solana

<img alt="SDK tools" src="img/sdk-tools.svg" class="center"/>

As shown in the diagram above an untrusted client, creates a program in the
language of their choice, (i.e. C/C++/Rust/Lua), and compiles it with LLVM to a
position independent shared object ELF, targeting BPF bytecode, and sends it to
the Solana cluster. Next, the client sends messages to the Solana cluster,
which target that program. The Solana runtime loads the previously submitted
ELF and passes it the client's message for interpretation.

## Persistent Storage

Solana supports several kinds of persistent storage, called *accounts*:

1. Executable
2. Writable by a client
3. Writable by a program
4. Read-only

All accounts are identified by public keys and may hold arbirary data.
When the client sends messages to programs, it requests access to storage
using those keys. The runtime loads the account data and passes it to the
program. The runtime also ensures accounts aren't written to if not owned
by the client or program. Any writes to read-only accounts are discarded
unless the write was to credit tokens. Any user may credit other accounts
tokens, regardless of account permission.
