book/src/getting-started.md, before:

# Getting Started

The Solana git repository contains all the scripts you might need to spin up your
own local testnet. Depending on what you're looking to achieve, you may want to
run a different variation, as the full-fledged, performance-enhanced
multinode testnet is considerably more complex to set up than a Rust-only,
singlenode testnode.  If you are looking to develop high-level features, such
as experimenting with smart contracts, save yourself some setup headaches and
stick to the Rust-only singlenode demo.  If you're doing performance optimization
of the transaction pipeline, consider the enhanced singlenode demo. If you're
doing consensus work, you'll need at least a Rust-only multinode demo. If you want
to reproduce our TPS metrics, run the enhanced multinode demo.

For all four variations, you'd need the latest Rust toolchain and the Solana
source code:

First, install Rust's package manager Cargo.

```bash
$ curl https://sh.rustup.rs -sSf | sh
$ source $HOME/.cargo/env
```

Now checkout the code from github:

```bash
$ git clone https://github.com/solana-labs/solana.git
$ cd solana
```

The demo code is sometimes broken between releases as we add new low-level
features, so if this is your first time running the demo, you'll improve
your odds of success if you check out the
[latest release](https://github.com/solana-labs/solana/releases)
before proceeding:

```bash
$ TAG=$(git describe --tags $(git rev-list --tags --max-count=1))
$ git checkout $TAG
```

### Configuration Setup

The network is initialized with a genesis ledger and leader/validator configuration files.
These files can be generated by running the following script.

```bash
$ ./multinode-demo/setup.sh
```

### Drone

In order for the leader, client and validators to work, we'll need to
spin up a drone to give out some test tokens.  The drone delivers Milton
Friedman-style "air drops" (free tokens to requesting clients) to be used in
test transactions.

Start the drone on the leader node with:

```bash
$ ./multinode-demo/drone.sh
```

### Singlenode Testnet

Before you start a fullnode, make sure you know the IP address of the machine you
want to be the leader for the demo, and make sure that udp ports 8000-10000 are
open on all the machines you want to test with.

Now start the server in a separate shell:

```bash
$ ./multinode-demo/leader.sh
```

Wait a few seconds for the server to initialize. It will print "leader ready..." when it's ready to
receive transactions. The leader will request some tokens from the drone if it doesn't have any.
The drone does not need to be running for subsequent leader starts.

### Multinode Testnet

To run a multinode testnet, after starting a leader node, spin up some validator nodes in
separate shells:

```bash
$ ./multinode-demo/validator.sh
```

To run a performance-enhanced leader or validator (on Linux),
[CUDA 10.0](https://developer.nvidia.com/cuda-downloads) must be installed on
your system:

```bash
$ ./fetch-perf-libs.sh
$ SOLANA_CUDA=1 ./multinode-demo/leader.sh
$ SOLANA_CUDA=1 ./multinode-demo/validator.sh
```


### Testnet Client Demo

Now that your singlenode or multinode testnet is up and running let's send it
some transactions!

In a separate shell start the client:

```bash
$ ./multinode-demo/client.sh # runs against localhost by default
```

What just happened? The client demo spins up several threads to send 500,000 transactions
to the testnet as quickly as it can. The client then pings the testnet periodically to see
how many transactions it processed in that time. Take note that the demo intentionally
floods the network with UDP packets, such that the network will almost certainly drop a
bunch of them. This ensures the testnet has an opportunity to reach 710k TPS. The client
demo completes after it has convinced itself the testnet won't process any additional
transactions. You should see several TPS measurements printed to the screen. In the
multinode variation, you'll see TPS measurements for each validator node as well.

## Public Testnet

In this example the client connects to our public testnet. To run validators on the testnet you would need to open udp ports `8000-10000`.

```bash
$ ./multinode-demo/client.sh --network $(dig +short testnet.solana.com):8001 --identity config-private/client-id.json --duration 60
```

You can observe the effects of your client's transactions on our [dashboard](https://metrics.solana.com:3000/d/testnet/testnet-hud?orgId=2&from=now-30m&to=now&refresh=5s&var-testnet=testnet)


## Linux Snap

A Linux [Snap](https://snapcraft.io/) is available, which can be used to easily
get Solana running on supported Linux systems without building anything from
source for evaluation.  Note that CUDA is not supported by the Snap so
performance will be limited.

The `edge` Snap channel is updated daily with the latest
development from the `master` branch.  To install:

```bash
$ sudo snap install solana --edge --devmode
```

Once installed the usual Solana programs will be available as `solona.*` instead
of `solana-*`.  For example, `solana.fullnode` instead of `solana-fullnode`.

Update to the latest version at any time with:

```bash
$ snap info solana
$ sudo snap refresh solana --devmode
```

### Daemon Support
The snap supports running a leader, validator or leader+drone node as a system
daemon.

Run `sudo snap get solana` to view the current daemon configuration.  To view
daemon logs:
1. Run `sudo snap logs -n=all solana` to view the daemon initialization log
2. Runtime logging can be found under `/var/snap/solana/current/leader/`,
`/var/snap/solana/current/validator/`, or `/var/snap/solana/current/drone/` depending
on which `mode=` was selected.  Within each log directory the file `current`
contains the latest log, and the files `*.s` (if present) contain older rotated
logs.

Disable the daemon at any time by running:

```bash
$ sudo snap set solana mode=
```

Runtime configuration files for the daemon can be found in
`/var/snap/solana/current/config`.

#### Leader Daemon

```bash
$ sudo snap set solana mode=bootstrap-fullnode
```

`rsync` must be configured and running on the leader.

1. Ensure rsync is installed with `sudo apt-get -y install rsync`
2. Edit `/etc/rsyncd.conf` to include the following
```ini
[config]
path = /var/snap/solana/current/config
hosts allow = *
read only = true
```
3. Run `sudo systemctl enable rsync; sudo systemctl start rsync`
4. Test by running `rsync -Pzravv rsync://<ip-address-of-leader>/config
solana-config` from another machine.  **If the leader is running on a cloud
provider it may be necessary to configure the Firewall rules to permit ingress
to port tcp:873, tcp:9900 and the port range udp:8000-udp:10000**


To run both the Leader and Drone:

```bash
$ sudo snap set solana mode=bootstrap-fullnode+drone

```

#### Validator daemon

```bash
$ sudo snap set solana mode=fullnode

```

By default the node will attempt to connect to **testnet.solana.com**, override the
cluster entrypoint IP address by running:

```bash
$ sudo snap set solana mode=fullnode entrypoint-ip=127.0.0.1 #<-- change IP address
```

It's assumed that the node at the entrypoint IP will be running `rsync`
configured as described in the previous **Leader daemon** section.

Commit message:

Rename leader/validator to bootstrap-leader/fullnode
Only rsyncing the genesis ledger snuck in here as well

book/src/getting-started.md, after:

# Getting Started

The Solana git repository contains all the scripts you might need to spin up your
own local testnet. Depending on what you're looking to achieve, you may want to
run a different variation, as the full-fledged, performance-enhanced
multinode testnet is considerably more complex to set up than a Rust-only,
singlenode testnode.  If you are looking to develop high-level features, such
as experimenting with smart contracts, save yourself some setup headaches and
stick to the Rust-only singlenode demo.  If you're doing performance optimization
of the transaction pipeline, consider the enhanced singlenode demo. If you're
doing consensus work, you'll need at least a Rust-only multinode demo. If you want
to reproduce our TPS metrics, run the enhanced multinode demo.

For all four variations, you'd need the latest Rust toolchain and the Solana
source code:

First, install Rust's package manager Cargo.

```bash
$ curl https://sh.rustup.rs -sSf | sh
$ source $HOME/.cargo/env
```

Now checkout the code from github:

```bash
$ git clone https://github.com/solana-labs/solana.git
$ cd solana
```

The demo code is sometimes broken between releases as we add new low-level
features, so if this is your first time running the demo, you'll improve
your odds of success if you check out the
[latest release](https://github.com/solana-labs/solana/releases)
before proceeding:

```bash
$ TAG=$(git describe --tags $(git rev-list --tags --max-count=1))
$ git checkout $TAG
```

### Configuration Setup

The network is initialized with a genesis ledger and fullnode configuration files.
These files can be generated by running the following script.

```bash
$ ./multinode-demo/setup.sh
```

### Drone

In order for the fullnodes and clients to work, we'll need to
spin up a drone to give out some test tokens.  The drone delivers Milton
Friedman-style "air drops" (free tokens to requesting clients) to be used in
test transactions.

Start the drone with:

```bash
$ ./multinode-demo/drone.sh
```

### Singlenode Testnet

Before you start a fullnode, make sure you know the IP address of the machine you
want to be the bootstrap leader for the demo, and make sure that udp ports 8000-10000 are
open on all the machines you want to test with.

Now start the bootstrap leader in a separate shell:

```bash
$ ./multinode-demo/bootstrap-leader.sh
```

Wait a few seconds for the server to initialize. It will print "leader ready..." when it's ready to
receive transactions. The leader will request some tokens from the drone if it doesn't have any.
The drone does not need to be running for subsequent leader starts.

### Multinode Testnet

To run a multinode testnet, after starting a leader node, spin up some
additional full nodes in separate shells:

```bash
$ ./multinode-demo/fullnode-x.sh
```

To run a performance-enhanced full node on Linux,
[CUDA 10.0](https://developer.nvidia.com/cuda-downloads) must be installed on
your system:

```bash
$ ./fetch-perf-libs.sh
$ SOLANA_CUDA=1 ./multinode-demo/bootstrap-leader.sh
$ SOLANA_CUDA=1 ./multinode-demo/fullnode-x.sh
```


### Testnet Client Demo

Now that your singlenode or multinode testnet is up and running let's send it
some transactions!

In a separate shell start the client:

```bash
$ ./multinode-demo/client.sh # runs against localhost by default
```

What just happened? The client demo spins up several threads to send 500,000 transactions
to the testnet as quickly as it can. The client then pings the testnet periodically to see
how many transactions it processed in that time. Take note that the demo intentionally
floods the network with UDP packets, such that the network will almost certainly drop a
bunch of them. This ensures the testnet has an opportunity to reach 710k TPS. The client
demo completes after it has convinced itself the testnet won't process any additional
transactions. You should see several TPS measurements printed to the screen. In the
multinode variation, you'll see TPS measurements for each validator node as well.

## Public Testnet

In this example the client connects to our public testnet. To run validators on the testnet you would need to open udp ports `8000-10000`.

```bash
$ ./multinode-demo/client.sh --network $(dig +short testnet.solana.com):8001 --identity config-private/client-id.json --duration 60
```

You can observe the effects of your client's transactions on our [dashboard](https://metrics.solana.com:3000/d/testnet/testnet-hud?orgId=2&from=now-30m&to=now&refresh=5s&var-testnet=testnet)


## Linux Snap

A Linux [Snap](https://snapcraft.io/) is available, which can be used to easily
get Solana running on supported Linux systems without building anything from
source for evaluation.  Note that CUDA is not supported by the Snap so
performance will be limited.

The `edge` Snap channel is updated daily with the latest
development from the `master` branch.  To install:

```bash
$ sudo snap install solana --edge --devmode
```

Once installed the usual Solana programs will be available as `solona.*` instead
of `solana-*`.  For example, `solana.fullnode` instead of `solana-fullnode`.

Update to the latest version at any time with:

```bash
$ snap info solana
$ sudo snap refresh solana --devmode
```

### Daemon Support
The snap supports running fullnodes and a drone as system daemons.

Run `sudo snap get solana` to view the current daemon configuration.  To view
daemon logs:
1. Run `sudo snap logs -n=all solana` to view the daemon initialization log
2. Runtime logging can be found under `/var/snap/solana/current/bootstrap-leader/`,
`/var/snap/solana/current/fullnode/`, or `/var/snap/solana/current/drone/` depending
on which `mode=` was selected.  Within each log directory the file `current`
contains the latest log, and the files `*.s` (if present) contain older rotated
logs.

Disable the daemon at any time by running:

```bash
$ sudo snap set solana mode=
```

Runtime configuration files for the daemon can be found in
`/var/snap/solana/current/config`.

#### Leader Daemon

```bash
$ sudo snap set solana mode=bootstrap-leader
```

`rsync` must be configured and running on the leader.

1. Ensure rsync is installed with `sudo apt-get -y install rsync`
2. Edit `/etc/rsyncd.conf` to include the following
```ini
[config]
path = /var/snap/solana/current/config
hosts allow = *
read only = true
```
3. Run `sudo systemctl enable rsync; sudo systemctl start rsync`
4. Test by running `rsync -Pzravv rsync://<ip-address-of-leader>/config
solana-config` from another machine.  **If the leader is running on a cloud
provider it may be necessary to configure the Firewall rules to permit ingress
to port tcp:873, tcp:9900 and the port range udp:8000-udp:10000**


To run both the Leader and Drone:

```bash
$ sudo snap set solana mode=bootstrap-leader+drone

```

#### Validator daemon

```bash
$ sudo snap set solana mode=fullnode

```

By default the node will attempt to connect to **testnet.solana.com**, override the
cluster entrypoint IP address by running:

```bash
$ sudo snap set solana mode=fullnode entrypoint-ip=127.0.0.1 #<-- change IP address
```

It's assumed that the node at the entrypoint IP will be running `rsync`
configured as described in the previous **Leader daemon** section.
