book/src/runtime.md, before:

# The Runtime

The runtime is a concurrent transaction processor. Transactions specify their
data dependencies upfront and dynamic memory allocation is explicit. By
separating program code from the state it operates on, the runtime is able to
choreograph concurrent access. Transactions accessing only credit-only
accounts are executed in parallel whereas transactions accessing writable
accounts are serialized.  The runtime interacts with the program through an
entrypoint with a well-defined interface.  The userdata stored in an account is
an opaque type, an array of bytes. The program has full control over its
contents.

The transaction structure specifies a list of public keys and signatures for
those keys and a sequential list of instructions that will operate over the
states associated with the account keys.  For the transaction to be committed
all the instructions must execute successfully; if any abort the whole
transaction fails to commit.

### Account Structure

Accounts maintain a lamport balance and program-specific memory.

# Transaction Engine

The engine maps public keys to accounts and routes them to the program's
entrypoint.

## Execution

Transactions are batched and processed in a pipeline.  The TPU and TVU follow a
slightly different path.  The TPU runtime ensures that PoH record occurs before
memory is committed.

The TVU runtime ensures that PoH verification occurs before the runtime
processes any transactions.

<img alt="Runtime pipeline" src="img/runtime.svg" class="center"/>

At the *execute* stage, the loaded accounts have no data dependencies, so all the
programs can be executed in parallel.

The runtime enforces the following rules:

1. Only the *owner* program may modify the contents of an account.  This means
that upon assignment userdata vector is guaranteed to be zero.

2. Total balances on all the accounts is equal before and after execution of a
transaction.

3. After the transaction is executed, balances of credit-only accounts must be
greater than or equal to the balances before the transaction.

4. All instructions in the transaction executed atomically. If one fails, all
account modifications are discarded.

Execution of the program involves mapping the program's public key to an
entrypoint which takes a pointer to the transaction, and an array of loaded
accounts.

## SystemProgram Interface

The interface is best described by the `Instruction::userdata` that the user
encodes.

* `CreateAccount` - This allows the user to create an account with an allocated
userdata array and assign it to a Program.

* `Assign` - Allows the user to assign an existing account to a program.

* `Move`  - Moves lamports between accounts.

## Program State Security

For blockchain to function correctly, the program code must be resilient to user
inputs.  That is why in this design the program specific code is the only code
that can change the state of the userdata byte array in the Accounts that are
assigned to it.  It is also the reason why `Assign` or `CreateAccount` must zero
out the userdata.  Otherwise there would be no possible way for the program to
distinguish the recently assigned account userdata from a natively generated
state transition without some additional metadata from the runtime to indicate
that this memory is assigned instead of natively generated.

To pass messages between programs, the receiving program must accept the message
and copy the state over.  But in practice a copy isn't needed and is
undesirable. The receiving program can read the state belonging to other
Accounts without copying it, and during the read it has a guarantee of the
sender program's state.

## Notes

* There is no dynamic memory allocation.  Client's need to use `CreateAccount`
instructions to create memory before passing it to another program.  This
instruction can be composed into a single transaction with the call to the
program itself.

* `CreateAccount` and `Assign` guarantee that when account is assigned to the
program, the Account's userdata is zero initialized.

* Once assigned to program an Account cannot be reassigned.

* Runtime guarantees that a program's code is the only code that can modify
Account userdata that the Account is assigned to.

* Runtime guarantees that the program can only spend lamports that are in
accounts that are assigned to it.

* Runtime guarantees the balances belonging to accounts are balanced before
and after the transaction.

* Runtime guarantees that instructions all executed successfully when a
transaction is committed.

# Future Work

* [Continuations and Signals for long running
  Transactions](https://github.com/solana-labs/solana/issues/1485)

Commit message:

Rename userdata to data (#3282)
* Rename userdata to data

Instead of saying "userdata", which is ambiguous and imprecise,
say "instruction data" or "account data".

Also, add `ProgramError::InvalidInstructionData`

Fixes #2761

book/src/runtime.md, after:

# The Runtime

The runtime is a concurrent transaction processor. Transactions specify their
data dependencies upfront and dynamic memory allocation is explicit. By
separating program code from the state it operates on, the runtime is able to
choreograph concurrent access. Transactions accessing only credit-only
accounts are executed in parallel whereas transactions accessing writable
accounts are serialized.  The runtime interacts with the program through an
entrypoint with a well-defined interface.  The data stored in an account is
an opaque type, an array of bytes. The program has full control over its
contents.

The transaction structure specifies a list of public keys and signatures for
those keys and a sequential list of instructions that will operate over the
states associated with the account keys.  For the transaction to be committed
all the instructions must execute successfully; if any abort the whole
transaction fails to commit.

### Account Structure

Accounts maintain a lamport balance and program-specific memory.

# Transaction Engine

The engine maps public keys to accounts and routes them to the program's
entrypoint.

## Execution

Transactions are batched and processed in a pipeline.  The TPU and TVU follow a
slightly different path.  The TPU runtime ensures that PoH record occurs before
memory is committed.

The TVU runtime ensures that PoH verification occurs before the runtime
processes any transactions.

<img alt="Runtime pipeline" src="img/runtime.svg" class="center"/>

At the *execute* stage, the loaded accounts have no data dependencies, so all the
programs can be executed in parallel.

The runtime enforces the following rules:

1. Only the *owner* program may modify the contents of an account.  This means
that upon assignment data vector is guaranteed to be zero.

2. Total balances on all the accounts is equal before and after execution of a
transaction.

3. After the transaction is executed, balances of credit-only accounts must be
greater than or equal to the balances before the transaction.

4. All instructions in the transaction executed atomically. If one fails, all
account modifications are discarded.

Execution of the program involves mapping the program's public key to an
entrypoint which takes a pointer to the transaction, and an array of loaded
accounts.

## SystemProgram Interface

The interface is best described by the `Instruction::data` that the user
encodes.

* `CreateAccount` - This allows the user to create an account with an allocated
data array and assign it to a Program.

* `Assign` - Allows the user to assign an existing account to a program.

* `Move`  - Moves lamports between accounts.

## Program State Security

For blockchain to function correctly, the program code must be resilient to user
inputs.  That is why in this design the program specific code is the only code
that can change the state of the data byte array in the Accounts that are
assigned to it.  It is also the reason why `Assign` or `CreateAccount` must zero
out the data.  Otherwise there would be no possible way for the program to
distinguish the recently assigned account data from a natively generated
state transition without some additional metadata from the runtime to indicate
that this memory is assigned instead of natively generated.

To pass messages between programs, the receiving program must accept the message
and copy the state over.  But in practice a copy isn't needed and is
undesirable. The receiving program can read the state belonging to other
Accounts without copying it, and during the read it has a guarantee of the
sender program's state.

## Notes

* There is no dynamic memory allocation.  Client's need to use `CreateAccount`
instructions to create memory before passing it to another program.  This
instruction can be composed into a single transaction with the call to the
program itself.

* `CreateAccount` and `Assign` guarantee that when account is assigned to the
program, the Account's data is zero initialized.

* Once assigned to program an Account cannot be reassigned.

* Runtime guarantees that a program's code is the only code that can modify
Account data that the Account is assigned to.

* Runtime guarantees that the program can only spend lamports that are in
accounts that are assigned to it.

* Runtime guarantees the balances belonging to accounts are balanced before
and after the transaction.

* Runtime guarantees that instructions all executed successfully when a
transaction is committed.

# Future Work

* [Continuations and Signals for long running
  Transactions](https://github.com/solana-labs/solana/issues/1485)
